# getdata-031Assignment
###bjw2119
This is the assignment for Jeff Leek's course on getting and cleaning data. The data used is from the data set created in: Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012. Portions of this README were also sourced from the project's README, but have been modified to reflect transformation of the data files within into a tidy data output. To read the output file in R, simply run data <- read.table(file_path, header = TRUE), and then proceed to View(data). A .csv version of this file has been included in the repository for ease of viewing.

The various data files (2 sets of 3 files of encoded observations and two keys to the observation files) are all processed by the script "run_analysis.R", which combines the 6 files of observations using appending as columns and rbind. The combined file is then filtered for variables reflecting the mean and standard deviation of a measurement and then aggregated so that only the means of those means and standard deviations of measurements are shown for each combination of the 30 subjects and 6 activities. The script in the repository is configured to pull the study files from the path including the original unzipped folder in the working directory, although it can be configured to read the files directly from the working directory with minor adjustments. The script outputs the tidy data into a .txt formatted table with now row names.

Per *Anguita et al*:
The study above was carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. See 'features_info.txt' for more details. 


